---
layout: post
title: Ubuntu on an HP Compaq dx2300 Microtower
---

My new desktop at varsity is, as described in the title, an HP Compaq dx2300 Microtower. First thing I did when I got access to it was, of course, to install Linux - Ubuntu 8.10 in this case. It's a pretty nice machine (although not particularly high-spec) and pretty much everything worked straight away from install. The graphics card is Intel, so I'm not going to be doing any serious gameplaying *(this is a work computer, anyway)* but it runs Compiz pretty well. Being a desktop, suspend and hibernate aren't terribly important, but as it happens they work fine.

The only problem - and this is the main point of this post - was with the soundcard (an Intel HDA). The box has three audio outputs: headphone plugs front and back, and a tinny built-in speaker. Under Ubuntu all three outputs were switched on all the time, and it wasn't possible to adjust them separately. The purpose of headphones in a shared lab environment is entirely defeated if the built-in speaker is always on! I tried fiddling with all of the multitude of ALSA settings, but nothing worked. It couldn't have been a hardware problem, because it did the right thing under Windows.

So, the problem was narrowed down to the audio driver, `snd-hda-intel` to be specific. Some googling established that changing the `model` parameter to the module might have some effect on the output selection behaviour. Further searching established that the possible values are listed in `[Documentation/sound/alsa/HD-Audio-Models.txt](http://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/sound/alsa/HD-Audio-Models.txt)` in the kernel source. To find out what the possible values are, you have to know which codec your card uses. This you can do by running

    cat /proc/asound/card0/codec#0 | grep Codec

For the dx2300 the result was `Realtek ALC888`. Indeed, under the list of models for the ALC888, there is one called "`3stack-hp`" for "HP machines with 3stack". Guessing that this was the correct one, I added to `/etc/modprobe.d/alsa-base` the line

    options snd-hda-intel model=3stack-hp

and rebooted. Hey presto, suddenly the internal speaker switches off when headphones are plugged in.

*tl;dr summary:* If you have a dx2300 and you're having problems with the audio under Linux, then add the line `options snd-hda-intel model=3stack-hp` to the file `/etc/modprobe.d/alsa-base` (at least in Ubuntu; your distro might put module options in a different file).
